README.rst, before:

Hostout - standarised deployment of buildout_ based applications with Fabric_
=============================================================================

Hostout gives you:

- the ability to configure your Farbic_ commands from within buildout_
- a framework for integrating different Fabric_ scripts via setup tools packages
- an out of the box deployment command for buildout_ based applications
- plugins to integrate deployment with supervisord and libcloud

Hostout is built around two ideas :-

1. Sharing Fabric_ command configuration amongst developers in a team
so where and how your applications is deployed becomes configuration, not
documentation. Deployment then becomes a single action by any member of the team.

2. Sharing fabric scripts via PyPi so we don't have to reinvent ways
to deploy or manage hosted applications

To contribute :-

- Code repository: http://github.com/collective/collective.hostout
- Questions and comments to http://github.com/collective/collective.hostout/issues
- Report bugs at http://github.com/collective/collective.hostout/issues

.. contents::


Overview
********

Hostout is a framework for managing remote buildouts via fabric scripts. It
includes many helpful builtin commands to package, deploy and bootstrap a
remote server with based on your local buildout.

You don't need to learn Fabric_ to use hostout but you will need to learn buildout_.
The good news is that many buildout's and snippets already exist for building django,
pylons, pyrimid, plone, zope, varnish, apache, haproxy or whichever server side
technology you want to deploy.

Users of hostout will be interested in

- Intergrating your fabfiles into buildout, or
- Deploying your buildout using hostout


Hostout deploy
**************

Hostout deploy is a built in Fabric command that packages your buildout and
any development eggs you might have, copies them to the server, prepares
the server to run and then runs buildout remotly for you. This makes it simple
to deploy your application.

Development buildout
--------------------

For example, let's say we had the worlds simplest wsgi application ::
    
    from webob import Request, Response
    
    def MainFactory(global_config, **local_conf):
        return MainApplication()
    
    class MainApplication(object):
        """An endpoint"""
        
        def __call__(self, environ, start_response):
            request = Request(environ)
            response = Response("Powered by collective.hostout!")
            return response(environ, start_response)
 
We keep this is a package in src/hellowsgi.
We will create a buildout cfg file called base.cfg ::

    [buildout]
    parts = demo pasterini
    develop =
      src/hellowsgi
    
    [demo]
    recipe=zc.recipe.egg
    eggs =
        PasteScript
        hellowsgi    
    
    [pasterini]
    recipe = collective.recipe.template
    output = parts/demo/paster.ini
    port = 8080
    input = inline:
        [server:main]
        use = egg:Paste#http
        host = 0.0.0.0
        port = ${:port}
        
        [pipeline:main]
        pipeline =
            app
        
        [app:app]
        use = egg:hellowsgi#main

Once we bootstrap and build this::

  $> python bootstrap.py -c base.cfg
  $> bin/buildout -c base.cfg
  
we have a working wsgi app if you run ::

  $> bin/paster serve parts/demo/paster.ini
  
Production buildout
-------------------

Next you will create a "production buildout" which extends your base.cfg.
This might contain parts to install webservers, databases, caching servers etc.

Our prod.cfg is very simple ::

  [buildout]
  extends = base.cfg
  parts += supervisor
  
  [supervisor]
  recipe=collective.recipe.supervisor
  programs=
    10 demo ${buildout:directory}/bin/paster [serve ${pasterini:outout}] ${buildout:directory} true

  [pasterini]
  port = 80


Deployment buildout
-------------------

Now create a 3rd buildout file, called buildout.cfg. This will be our development/deployment
buildout ::

    [buildout]
    extends = base.cfg
    parts += host1
     
    [host1]
    recipe = collective.hostout
    host = myhost.com
    hostos = ubuntu
    user = myusername
    path = /var/buildout/demo
    buildout = prod.cfg
    post-commands = bin/supervisord
    
This buildout part will install a script which will deploy prod.cfg
along with hellowsgi to remote path /var/buildout/demo on our server myhost.com ::

  $> bin/buildout
  Develop: '.../example'
  Uninstalling host1.
  Installing demo.
  Installing host1.

As part of the buildout process hostout will automatically determine the
versions of all the eggs in your development buildout in a file
called "hostoutversions.cfg" and will pin them for
you during deployment. This ensures that the production buildout will
be running the same software as you have tested locally. Remeber to
manually version pin any additional eggs you use in your prod.cfg
as these will not be pinned for you.

Running hostout deploy for the first time
-----------------------------------------

The bin/hostout command takes three kinds of parameters, ::

 hostout [hostname(s)] [commands] [command arguments]
 
in our case we will run ::

 $> bin/hostout host1 deploy
 
The first thing will do is ask you your password and attempt to login in to your
server. It will then look for /var/buildout/demo/bin/buildout and when it doesn't
find it it will automatically run another hostout command called "bootstrap".

Bootstrap is further broken down into three commands, bootstrap_users_,
bootstrap_python_ and bootstrap_buildout_. These will create an additional users
to build and run your application, install basic system packages needed to
run buildout and install buildout into your remote path. It will attempt to
detect which version of linux your server is running to os python, but if this
fails it will attempt to compile python from source. The version of python used
will match the major verison of python which your development buildout uses.

Deploying and redeploying
-------------------------

Once hostout bootstrap has ensured a working remote buildout, deployment will continue
by running the following commands
  
1. "uploadeggs": Any develop eggs are released as eggs and uploaded to the server. These will
uploaded directly into the buildouts buidout-cache/downloads/dist directory which buildout
uses find packages before looking up the package index. It's very important your development
packages package properly by including all the relevent files. The easiest way to do this
is by using source control, checking in all your source files and installing the relevent
setuptools plugin for your source control. e.g. for git do "easy_install setuptools-git"
  
2. "uploadbuildout": The relevent .cfg files and any files/directories in the "include"
paramater are synced to the remote server.
  
3. "buildout": The uploaded production buildout is run on the remote server.

If you continue to develop your application you can run hostout deploy each time
and it will only upload the eggs that have changed and buildout will only reinstall
changed parts of the buildout.

In our example above deployment would look something like this ::

    $> bin/hostout host1 deploy
    running clean
    ...
    creating '...example-0.0.0dev_....egg' and adding '...' to it
    ...
    Hostout: Running command 'predeploy' from 'collective.hostout'
    ...
    Hostout: Running command 'uploadeggs' from 'collective.hostout'
    Hostout: Preparing eggs for transport
    Hostout: Develop egg src/demo changed. Releasing with hash ...
    Hostout: Eggs to transport:
    	demo = 0.0.0dev-...
    Hostout: Wrote versions to host1.cfg
    ...
    Hostout: Running command 'uploadbuildout' from 'collective.hostout'
    ...
    Hostout: Running command 'buildout' from 'collective/hostout'
    ...
    Hostout: Running command 'postdeploy' from 'collective/hostout'
    ...

Now if you visit myhost.com you will see your web application shared with the world

Other Builtin Commands
**********************

Hostout comes with a set of helpful commands. You can show this list by
not specifying any command at all. The list of commands will vary depending
on what fabfiles your hostout references. ::

 $> bin/hostout host1
 cmdline is: bin/hostout host1 [host2...] [all] cmd1 [cmd2...] [arg1 arg2...]
 Valid commands are:
   bootstrap        : Install python and users needed to run buildout
   buildout         : Run the buildout on the remote server
   deploy           : predeploy, uploadeggs, uploadbuildout, buildout and then postdeploy
   postdeploy       : Perform any final plugin tasks
   predeploy        : Install buildout and its dependencies if needed. Hookpoint for plugins
   setupusers       : create buildout and the effective user and allow hostout access
   setowners        : Ensure ownership and permissions are correct on buildout and cache
   run              : Execute cmd on remote as login user
   sudo             : Execute cmd on remote as root user
   uploadbuildout   : Upload buildout pinned to local picked versions + uploaded eggs
   uploadeggs       : Any develop eggs are released as eggs and uploaded to the server


The run command is helpful to run quick remote commands as the buildout user on the remote host ::

 $> bin/hostout host1 run pwd
 Hostout: Running command 'run' from collective.hostout
 Logging into the following hosts as root:
     127.0.0.1
 [127.0.0.1] run: sh -c "cd /var/host1 && pwd"
 [127.0.0.1] out: ...
 Done.

We can also use our login user and password to run quick sudo commands ::

 $> bin/hostout host1 sudo cat /etc/hosts 
 Hostout: Running command 'sudo' from collective.hostout
 Logging into the following hosts as root:
     127.0.0.1
 [127.0.0.1] run: sh -c "cd /var/host1 && cat/etc/hosts" 
 [127.0.0.1] out: ...
 Done.


Detailed Hostout Options
************************

Basic Options
-------------

host
  the IP or hostname of the host to deploy to. by default it will connect to port 22 using ssh.
  You can override the port by using hostname:port

user
  The user which hostout will attempt to login to your host as. Will read a users ssh config to get a default.

password
  The password for the login user. If not given then hostout will ask each time.
  
identity-file
  A public key for the login user.

extends 
  Specifies another part which contains defaults for this hostout
  
fabfiles
  Path to fabric files that contain commands which can then be called from the hostout
  script. Commands can access hostout options via hostout.options from the fabric environment.


Deploy options
--------------

buildout
  The configuration file you which to build on the remote host. Note this doesn't have
  to be the same .cfg as the hostout section is in but the versions of the eggs will be determined
  from the buildout with the hostout section in. Defaults to buildout.cfg
  

path
  The absolute path on the remote host where the buildout will be created.
  Defaults to ~${hostout:effective-user}/buildout

pre-commands
  A series of shell commands executed as root before the buildout is run. You can use this 
  to shut down your application. If these commands fail they will be ignored.
  
post-commands
  A series of shell commands executed as root after the buildout is run. You can use this 
  to startup your application. If these commands fail they will be ignored.
  
sudo-parts
  Buildout parts which will be installed after the main buildout has been run. These will be run
  as root.

parts
  Runs the buildout with a parts value equal to this
  
include
  Additional configuration files or directories needed to run this buildout
   
buildout-cache
  If you want to override the default location for the buildout-cache on the host

python-version
  The version of python to install during bootstrapping. Defaults to version
  used in the local buildout.
  
hostos
  Over which platform specific bootstrap_python command is called. For instance
  if hostos=redhat, bootstrap_python_redhat will be called to use "yum" to
  install python and other developer tools. This paramter is also used in
  hostout.cloud_ to pick which VM to create.


Users and logins
----------------

#TODO

effective-user
  This user will own the buildouts var files. This allows the application to write to database files
  in the var directory but not be allowed to write to any other part of teh buildout code.
  
buildout-user
  The user which will own the buildout files. During bootstrap this user will be created and be given a ssh key
  such that hostout can login and run buildout using this account.

buildout-group
  A group which will own the buildout files including the var files. This group is created if needed in the bootstrap
  command.



Integrating Fabric into buildout
********************************

Hostout uses fabric files. Fabric is an easy way to write python that
calls commands on a host over ssh.


Here is a basic fabfile which will echo two variables on the remote server.


>>> write('fabfile.py',"""
...
... from fabric import api
... from fabric.api import run
...
... def echo(cmdline1):
...    option1 = api.env.option1
...    run("echo '%s %s'" % (option1, cmdline1) )
...
... """)

Using hostout we can predefine some of the fabric scripts parameters
as well as install the fabric runner. Each hostout part in your buildout.cfg
represents a connection to a server at a given path.

>>> write('buildout.cfg',
... """
... [buildout]
... parts = host1
...
... [host1]
... recipe = collective.hostout
... host = 127.0.0.1:10022
... fabfiles = fabfile.py
... option1 = buildout
... user = root
... password = root
... path = /var/host1
...
... """ )

If you don't include your password you will be prompted for it later.    

When we run buildout a special fabric runner will be installed called bin/hostout

>>> print system('bin/buildout -N')
Installing host1.
Generated script '/sample-buildout/bin/hostout'.


>>> print system('bin/hostout')
cmdline is: bin/hostout host1 [host2...] [all] cmd1 [cmd2...] [arg1 arg2...]
Valid hosts are: host1

We can run our fabfile by providing the

 - host which refers to the part name in buildout.cfg.
 
 - command which refers to the method name in the fabfile
 
 - any other options we want to pass to the command
 
Note: We can run multiple commands on one or more hosts using a single commandline.

In our example

>>> print system('bin/hostout host1 echo "is cool"')
Hostout: Running command 'echo' from 'fabfile.py'
Logging into the following hosts as root:
    127.0.0.1
[127.0.0.1] run: echo 'cd /var/host1 && buildout is cool'
[127.0.0.1] out: ...
Done.

Note that we combined information from our buildout with
commandline paramaters to determine the exact command sent
to our server.

Making a hostout plugin
-----------------------

It can be very helpful to package up our fabfiles for others to use.

Hostout Plugins are eggs with three parts :-

1. Fabric script

2. A zc.buildout recipe to initialise the parameters of the fabric file commands

3. Entry points for both the recipe and the fabric scripts

>>>    entry_points = {'zc.buildout': ['default = hostout.myplugin:Recipe',],
...                    'fabric': ['fabfile = hostout.myplugin.fabfile']
...                    },

Once packaged and released others can add your plugin to their hostout e.g.

>>> write('buildout.cfg',
... """
... [buildout]
... parts = host1
...
... [host1]
... recipe = collective.hostout
... extends = hostout.myplugin
... param1 = blah
... """ )

>>> print system('bin/buildout')

>>> print system('bin/hostout host1')
cmdline is: bin/hostout host1 [host2...] [all] cmd1 [cmd2...] [arg1 arg2...]
Valid commands are:
...
   mycommand        : example of command from hostout.myplugin


#TODO Example of echo plugin


Using fabric plugins
--------------------

You use commands others have made via the extends option.
Name a buildout recipe egg in the extends option and buildout will download
and merge any fabfiles and other configuration options from that recipe into
your current hostout configuration.  The following are examples of builtin
plugins.  Others are available on pypi.

hostout.cloud_
  Will create VM instances automatically for you on many popular hosting services such
  as Amazon, Rackspace and Slicehost

hostout.supervisor_
  Will stop a supervisor before buildout is run and restart it afterwards. It provides
  some short commands to quickly manage your applications from your hostout
  commandline


.. _hostout.cloud: http://pypi.python.org/pypi/hostout.cloud
.. _hostout.supervisor: http://pypi.python.org/pypi/hostout.supervisor




Why hostout
***********

Managing multiple environments can be a real pain and a barrier to development.
Hostout puts all of the settings for all of your environments in an easy-to-manage format.

Compared to

SilverLining
 Hostout allows you to deploy many different kinds of applications instead of just wsgi based
 python apps. Buildout lets you define the installation of alomost any kind of application.
 
Puppet
 TODO
 
mr.awesome
 TODO
 
Fabric
 TODO
 
Egg Proxies
   TODO

 

Using hostout with a python2.4 buildout
***************************************

Hostout itself requires python2.6. However it is possible to use hostout with
a buildout that requires python 2.4 by using buildout's support for different
python interpretters.

>>> write('buildout.cfg',
... """
... [buildout]
... parts = host1
...
... [host1]
... recipe = collective.hostout
... host = 127.0.0.1:10022
... python = python26
...
... [python26]
... executalble = /path/to/your/python2.6/binary
...
... """ )

or alternatively if you don't want to use your local python you can get buildoit to
build it for you.


>>> write('buildout.cfg',
... """
... [buildout]
... parts = host1
...
... [host1]
... recipe = collective.hostout
... host = 127.0.0.1:10022
... python = python26
...
... [python26]
... recipe = zc.recipe.cmmi
... url = http://www.python.org/ftp/python/2.6.1/Python-2.6.1.tgz
... executable = ${buildout:directory}/parts/python/bin/python2.6
... extra_options=
...    --enable-unicode=ucs4
...    --with-threads
...    --with-readline
...
... """ )



Credits
*******

Dylan Jay ( software at pretaweb_ dot com )


.. _recipe: http://pypi.python.org/pypi/zc.buildout#recipes
.. _fabric: http://fabfile.org
.. _Fabric: http://fabfile.org
.. _buildout: http://www.buildout.org
.. _pretaweb: http://www.pretaweb.com

Commit message:

add documentation about users and key files

README.rst, after:

Hostout - standarised deployment of buildout_ based applications with Fabric_
=============================================================================

Hostout gives you:

- the ability to configure your Farbic_ commands from within buildout_
- a framework for integrating different Fabric_ scripts via setup tools packages
- an out of the box deployment command for buildout_ based applications
- plugins to integrate deployment with supervisord and libcloud

Hostout is built around two ideas :-

1. Sharing Fabric_ command configuration amongst developers in a team
so where and how your applications is deployed becomes configuration, not
documentation. Deployment then becomes a single action by any member of the team.

2. Sharing fabric scripts via PyPi so we don't have to reinvent ways
to deploy or manage hosted applications

To contribute :-

- Code repository: http://github.com/collective/collective.hostout
- Questions and comments to http://github.com/collective/collective.hostout/issues
- Report bugs at http://github.com/collective/collective.hostout/issues

.. contents::


Overview
********

Hostout is a framework for managing remote buildouts via fabric scripts. It
includes many helpful builtin commands to package, deploy and bootstrap a
remote server with based on your local buildout.

You don't need to learn Fabric_ to use hostout but you will need to learn buildout_.
The good news is that many buildout's and snippets already exist for building django,
pylons, pyramid, plone, zope, varnish, apache, haproxy or whichever server side
technology you want to deploy.

Users of hostout will be interested in

- Intergrating your fabfiles into buildout, or
- Deploying your buildout using hostout


Hostout deploy
**************

Hostout deploy is a built in Fabric command that packages your buildout and
any development eggs you might have, copies them to the server, prepares
the server to run and then runs buildout remotly for you. This makes it simple
to deploy your application.

Development buildout
--------------------

For example, let's say we had the worlds simplest wsgi application ::
    
    from webob import Request, Response
    
    def MainFactory(global_config, **local_conf):
        return MainApplication()
    
    class MainApplication(object):
        """An endpoint"""
        
        def __call__(self, environ, start_response):
            request = Request(environ)
            response = Response("Powered by collective.hostout!")
            return response(environ, start_response)
 
We keep this is a package in src/hellowsgi.
We will create a buildout cfg file called base.cfg ::

    [buildout]
    parts = demo pasterini
    develop =
      src/hellowsgi
    
    [demo]
    recipe=zc.recipe.egg
    eggs =
        PasteScript
        hellowsgi    
    
    [pasterini]
    recipe = collective.recipe.template
    output = parts/demo/paster.ini
    port = 8080
    input = inline:
        [server:main]
        use = egg:Paste#http
        host = 0.0.0.0
        port = ${:port}
        
        [pipeline:main]
        pipeline =
            app
        
        [app:app]
        use = egg:hellowsgi#main

Once we bootstrap and build this::

  $> python bootstrap.py -c base.cfg
  $> bin/buildout -c base.cfg
  
we have a working wsgi app if you run ::

  $> bin/paster serve parts/demo/paster.ini
  
Production buildout
-------------------

Next you will create a "production buildout" which extends your base.cfg.
This might contain parts to install webservers, databases, caching servers etc.

Our prod.cfg is very simple ::

  [buildout]
  extends = base.cfg
  parts += supervisor
  
  [supervisor]
  recipe=collective.recipe.supervisor
  programs=
    10 demo ${buildout:directory}/bin/paster [serve ${pasterini:outout}] ${buildout:directory} true

  [pasterini]
  port = 80


Deployment buildout
-------------------

Now create a 3rd buildout file, called buildout.cfg. This will be our development/deployment
buildout ::

    [buildout]
    extends = base.cfg
    parts += host1
     
    [host1]
    recipe = collective.hostout
    host = myhost.com
    hostos = ubuntu
    user = myusername
    path = /var/buildout/demo
    buildout = prod.cfg
    post-commands = bin/supervisord
    
This buildout part will install a script which will deploy prod.cfg
along with hellowsgi to remote path /var/buildout/demo on our server myhost.com ::

  $> bin/buildout
  Develop: '.../example'
  Uninstalling host1.
  Installing demo.
  Installing host1.

As part of the buildout process hostout will automatically determine the
versions of all the eggs in your development buildout in a file
called "hostoutversions.cfg" and will pin them for
you during deployment. This ensures that the production buildout will
be running the same software as you have tested locally. Remeber to
manually version pin any additional eggs you use in your prod.cfg
as these will not be pinned for you.

Running hostout deploy for the first time
-----------------------------------------

The bin/hostout command takes three kinds of parameters, ::

 hostout [hostname(s)] [commands] [command arguments]
 
in our case we will run ::

 $> bin/hostout host1 deploy
 
The first thing will do is ask you your password and attempt to login in to your
server. It will then look for /var/buildout/demo/bin/buildout and when it doesn't
find it it will automatically run another hostout command called "bootstrap".

Bootstrap is further broken down into three commands, bootstrap_users_,
bootstrap_python_ and bootstrap_buildout_. These will create an additional users
to build and run your application, install basic system packages needed to
run buildout and install buildout into your remote path. It will attempt to
detect which version of linux your server is running to os python, but if this
fails it will attempt to compile python from source. The version of python used
will match the major verison of python which your development buildout uses.

Deploying and redeploying
-------------------------

Once hostout bootstrap has ensured a working remote buildout, deployment will continue
by running the following commands
  
1. "uploadeggs": Any develop eggs are released as eggs and uploaded to the server. These will
uploaded directly into the buildouts buidout-cache/downloads/dist directory which buildout
uses find packages before looking up the package index. It's very important your development
packages package properly by including all the relevent files. The easiest way to do this
is by using source control, checking in all your source files and installing the relevent
setuptools plugin for your source control. e.g. for git do "easy_install setuptools-git"
  
2. "uploadbuildout": The relevent .cfg files and any files/directories in the "include"
paramater are synced to the remote server.
  
3. "buildout": The uploaded production buildout is run on the remote server.

If you continue to develop your application you can run hostout deploy each time
and it will only upload the eggs that have changed and buildout will only reinstall
changed parts of the buildout.

In our example above deployment would look something like this ::

    $> bin/hostout host1 deploy
    running clean
    ...
    creating '...example-0.0.0dev_....egg' and adding '...' to it
    ...
    Hostout: Running command 'predeploy' from 'collective.hostout'
    ...
    Hostout: Running command 'uploadeggs' from 'collective.hostout'
    Hostout: Preparing eggs for transport
    Hostout: Develop egg src/demo changed. Releasing with hash ...
    Hostout: Eggs to transport:
    	demo = 0.0.0dev-...
    Hostout: Wrote versions to host1.cfg
    ...
    Hostout: Running command 'uploadbuildout' from 'collective.hostout'
    ...
    Hostout: Running command 'buildout' from 'collective/hostout'
    ...
    Hostout: Running command 'postdeploy' from 'collective/hostout'
    ...

Now if you visit myhost.com you will see your web application shared with the world

Other Builtin Commands
**********************

Hostout comes with a set of helpful commands. You can show this list by
not specifying any command at all. The list of commands will vary depending
on what fabfiles your hostout references. ::

 $> bin/hostout host1
 cmdline is: bin/hostout host1 [host2...] [all] cmd1 [cmd2...] [arg1 arg2...]
 Valid commands are:
   bootstrap        : Install python and users needed to run buildout
   buildout         : Run the buildout on the remote server
   deploy           : predeploy, uploadeggs, uploadbuildout, buildout and then postdeploy
   postdeploy       : Perform any final plugin tasks
   predeploy        : Install buildout and its dependencies if needed. Hookpoint for plugins
   setupusers       : create buildout and the effective user and allow hostout access
   setowners        : Ensure ownership and permissions are correct on buildout and cache
   run              : Execute cmd on remote as login user
   sudo             : Execute cmd on remote as root user
   uploadbuildout   : Upload buildout pinned to local picked versions + uploaded eggs
   uploadeggs       : Any develop eggs are released as eggs and uploaded to the server


The run command is helpful to run quick remote commands as the buildout user on the remote host ::

 $> bin/hostout host1 run pwd
 Hostout: Running command 'run' from collective.hostout
 Logging into the following hosts as root:
     127.0.0.1
 [127.0.0.1] run: sh -c "cd /var/host1 && pwd"
 [127.0.0.1] out: ...
 Done.

We can also use our login user and password to run quick sudo commands ::

 $> bin/hostout host1 sudo cat /etc/hosts 
 Hostout: Running command 'sudo' from collective.hostout
 Logging into the following hosts as root:
     127.0.0.1
 [127.0.0.1] run: sh -c "cd /var/host1 && cat/etc/hosts" 
 [127.0.0.1] out: ...
 Done.


Detailed Hostout Options
************************

Basic Options
-------------

host
  the IP or hostname of the host to deploy to. by default it will connect to port 22 using ssh.
  You can override the port by using hostname:port

user
  The user which hostout will attempt to login to your host as. Will read a users ssh config to get a default.

password
  The password for the login user. If not given then hostout will ask each time.
  
identity-file
  A public key for the login user.

extends 
  Specifies another part which contains defaults for this hostout
  
fabfiles
  Path to fabric files that contain commands which can then be called from the hostout
  script. Commands can access hostout options via hostout.options from the fabric environment.


Deploy options
--------------

buildout
  The configuration file you which to build on the remote host. Note this doesn't have
  to be the same .cfg as the hostout section is in but the versions of the eggs will be determined
  from the buildout with the hostout section in. Defaults to buildout.cfg
  

path
  The absolute path on the remote host where the buildout will be created.
  Defaults to ~${hostout:effective-user}/buildout

pre-commands
  A series of shell commands executed as root before the buildout is run. You can use this 
  to shut down your application. If these commands fail they will be ignored.
  
post-commands
  A series of shell commands executed as root after the buildout is run. You can use this 
  to startup your application. If these commands fail they will be ignored.
  
sudo-parts
  Buildout parts which will be installed after the main buildout has been run. These will be run
  as root.

parts
  Runs the buildout with a parts value equal to this
  
include
  Additional configuration files or directories needed to run this buildout
   
buildout-cache
  If you want to override the default location for the buildout-cache on the host

python-version
  The version of python to install during bootstrapping. Defaults to version
  used in the local buildout.
  
hostos
  Over which platform specific bootstrap_python command is called. For instance
  if hostos=redhat, bootstrap_python_redhat will be called to use "yum" to
  install python and other developer tools. This paramter is also used in
  hostout.cloud_ to pick which VM to create.


Users and logins
----------------

The bootstrap_users command is called as part of the bootstrap process which is called if no buildout has
already been bootstraped on the remote server. This command will login using "user" 
(the user should have sudo rights) and create two additional users and a group which joins them.

effective-user
  This user will own the buildouts var files. This allows the application to write to database files
  in the var directory but not be allowed to write to any other part of the buildout code.
  
buildout-user
  The user which will own the buildout files. During bootstrap this user will be created and be given a ssh key
  such that hostout can login and run buildout using this account.

buildout-group
  A group which will own the buildout files including the var files. This group is created if needed in the bootstrap_users
  command.

In addition the private key will be read from the location "identity_file" and be used to create 
a password-less login for the "buildout-user" account by copying the public key into the "authorized_keys"
file of the buildout_user account. If no file exists for "identity_file" a DSA private key is created for you
in the file "${hostname}_key" in the buildout directory.
During a normal deployment all steps are run as the buildout-user so there is no need to use the "user" account
and therefore supply a password. The exception to this is if you specify "pre-deploy", "post-deploy" or "sudo-parts" steps
or have to bootstrap the server. These require the use of the sudo-capable "user" account.
If you'd like to share the ability to deploy your application with others, one way to do this is to simply
checkin the private key file specified by "identity_file" along with your buildout. If you do share deployment, 
remember to pin your eggs in your buildout so the result is consistent no matter where  it is deployed from. One trick 
you can use to achieve this is to add "hostoutversions.cfg" to the "extends" of your buildout and commit
"hostoutversions.cfg" to your source control as well.



Integrating Fabric into buildout
********************************

Hostout uses fabric files. Fabric is an easy way to write python that
calls commands on a host over ssh.


Here is a basic fabfile which will echo two variables on the remote server.


>>> write('fabfile.py',"""
...
... from fabric import api
... from fabric.api import run
...
... def echo(cmdline1):
...    option1 = api.env.option1
...    run("echo '%s %s'" % (option1, cmdline1) )
...
... """)

Using hostout we can predefine some of the fabric scripts parameters
as well as install the fabric runner. Each hostout part in your buildout.cfg
represents a connection to a server at a given path.

>>> write('buildout.cfg',
... """
... [buildout]
... parts = host1
...
... [host1]
... recipe = collective.hostout
... host = 127.0.0.1:10022
... fabfiles = fabfile.py
... option1 = buildout
... user = root
... password = root
... path = /var/host1
...
... """ )

If you don't include your password you will be prompted for it later.    

When we run buildout a special fabric runner will be installed called bin/hostout

>>> print system('bin/buildout -N')
Installing host1.
Generated script '/sample-buildout/bin/hostout'.


>>> print system('bin/hostout')
cmdline is: bin/hostout host1 [host2...] [all] cmd1 [cmd2...] [arg1 arg2...]
Valid hosts are: host1

We can run our fabfile by providing the

 - host which refers to the part name in buildout.cfg.
 
 - command which refers to the method name in the fabfile
 
 - any other options we want to pass to the command
 
Note: We can run multiple commands on one or more hosts using a single commandline.

In our example

>>> print system('bin/hostout host1 echo "is cool"')
Hostout: Running command 'echo' from 'fabfile.py'
Logging into the following hosts as root:
    127.0.0.1
[127.0.0.1] run: echo 'cd /var/host1 && buildout is cool'
[127.0.0.1] out: ...
Done.

Note that we combined information from our buildout with
commandline paramaters to determine the exact command sent
to our server.

Making a hostout plugin
-----------------------

It can be very helpful to package up our fabfiles for others to use.

Hostout Plugins are eggs with three parts :-

1. Fabric script

2. A zc.buildout recipe to initialise the parameters of the fabric file commands

3. Entry points for both the recipe and the fabric scripts

>>>    entry_points = {'zc.buildout': ['default = hostout.myplugin:Recipe',],
...                    'fabric': ['fabfile = hostout.myplugin.fabfile']
...                    },

Once packaged and released others can add your plugin to their hostout e.g.

>>> write('buildout.cfg',
... """
... [buildout]
... parts = host1
...
... [host1]
... recipe = collective.hostout
... extends = hostout.myplugin
... param1 = blah
... """ )

>>> print system('bin/buildout')

>>> print system('bin/hostout host1')
cmdline is: bin/hostout host1 [host2...] [all] cmd1 [cmd2...] [arg1 arg2...]
Valid commands are:
...
   mycommand        : example of command from hostout.myplugin


#TODO Example of echo plugin


Using fabric plugins
--------------------

You use commands others have made via the extends option.
Name a buildout recipe egg in the extends option and buildout will download
and merge any fabfiles and other configuration options from that recipe into
your current hostout configuration.  The following are examples of builtin
plugins.  Others are available on pypi.

hostout.cloud_
  Will create VM instances automatically for you on many popular hosting services such
  as Amazon, Rackspace and Slicehost

hostout.supervisor_
  Will stop a supervisor before buildout is run and restart it afterwards. It provides
  some short commands to quickly manage your applications from your hostout
  commandline


.. _hostout.cloud: http://pypi.python.org/pypi/hostout.cloud
.. _hostout.supervisor: http://pypi.python.org/pypi/hostout.supervisor




Why hostout
***********

Managing multiple environments can be a real pain and a barrier to development.
Hostout puts all of the settings for all of your environments in an easy-to-manage format.

Compared to

SilverLining
 Hostout allows you to deploy many different kinds of applications instead of just wsgi based
 python apps. Buildout lets you define the installation of alomost any kind of application.
 
Puppet
 TODO
 
mr.awesome
 TODO
 
Fabric
 TODO
 
Egg Proxies
   TODO

 

Using hostout with a python2.4 buildout
***************************************

Hostout itself requires python2.6. However it is possible to use hostout with
a buildout that requires python 2.4 by using buildout's support for different
python interpretters.

>>> write('buildout.cfg',
... """
... [buildout]
... parts = host1
...
... [host1]
... recipe = collective.hostout
... host = 127.0.0.1:10022
... python = python26
...
... [python26]
... executalble = /path/to/your/python2.6/binary
...
... """ )

or alternatively if you don't want to use your local python you can get buildoit to
build it for you.


>>> write('buildout.cfg',
... """
... [buildout]
... parts = host1
...
... [host1]
... recipe = collective.hostout
... host = 127.0.0.1:10022
... python = python26
...
... [python26]
... recipe = zc.recipe.cmmi
... url = http://www.python.org/ftp/python/2.6.1/Python-2.6.1.tgz
... executable = ${buildout:directory}/parts/python/bin/python2.6
... extra_options=
...    --enable-unicode=ucs4
...    --with-threads
...    --with-readline
...
... """ )



Credits
*******

Dylan Jay ( software at pretaweb_ dot com )


.. _recipe: http://pypi.python.org/pypi/zc.buildout#recipes
.. _fabric: http://fabfile.org
.. _Fabric: http://fabfile.org
.. _buildout: http://www.buildout.org
.. _pretaweb: http://www.pretaweb.com
